Add initial docs for scheduling and affinity (#104)
XenitAB/xenitab.github.io: docs/xks/developer-guide/scheduling.md

---
id: scheduling
title: Scheduling Pods
---

## Scheduling

### Kubernetes Scheduler

The kube-scheduler looks for newly created pods that doesnt have any assigned node. The nodes that meet the requirements to run a pod is called a feasible node.

>  Kube-scheduler becomes responsible for assiging a suitable node to the pod based on 2 criteria:

Author: assigning

1. Filtering - Checks available nodes for available resources, to meet requirements specificed in the pod.
2. Scoring - Based on the available resources when Filtering, ranking the avaliable nodes and choosing the highest ranking one, if 2 or more are equal, selection is random.

### Node Selector

You can schedule pods based on labels and nodeSelector, for example: "disktype: ssd"

Nodeconfig:
```yaml
lables:

>     disktype: ssd

Reviewer: Overall we don't want disk related jobs on our kubernetes clusters.
I would change this to something like gpuEnabled: "true" or something similar.

podAnitAffinity

```yaml
spec:
  affinity:
    podAffinity:
      requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution:
      - labelSelector:
          matchExpressions:
          - key: label1
            operator: In
            values:
            - label-value
        topologyKey: topology.kubernetes.io/zone
    podAntiAffinity:
      preferredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution:
      - weight: 100
        podAffinityTerm:
          labelSelector:
            matchExpressions:
            - key: label2
              operator: In
              values:
              - label-value-anti
          topologyKey: topology.kubernetes.io/zone
```
This example show an example where we use both affinity rules.

Affinity rule: the pod can be only scheduled onto a node if that node is in the same zone as at least one already-running pod that has a label with key "label1" and value "label-value".

antiAffinity rule: the pod should not be scheduled onto a node if that node is in the same zone as a pod with label having key "label2" and value "label-valu-anti"

> ```yaml

Reviewer: https://github.com/XenitAB/terraform-modules/blob/e6df36b0dc7d3573bba6b04ecdf4407948d7afe0/modules/kubernetes/prometheus/charts/prometheus-extras/templates/prometheus.yaml#L90-L110

Please use this example.

  affinity:
    podAntiAffinity:
      preferredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution:
        - podAffinityTerm:
            labelSelector:
              matchExpressions:
                - key: app.kubernetes.io/name
                  operator: In
                  values:
                    - ingress-nginx
            topologyKey: topology.kubernetes.io/zone
          weight: 100
```
This is an example configuration of podAntiAffinity for Ingress-nginx, to spread the pod deployment based on topology.kubernetes.io/zone. To mitigate downtime in case an entire zone goes down. i.e if a pod runs in zone A with key "app.kubernetes.io/name" and value "ingress-nginx" dont schedule in zone A, choose zone B or C.

> 

Reviewer: I would create references to the official docs.

---
id: scheduling
title: Scheduling Pods
---

## Scheduling

### Kubernetes Scheduler

> The kube-scheduler looks for newly created pods that doesnt have any assigned node. The nodes that meet the requirements to run a pod is called a feasible node.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The kube-scheduler looks for newly created pods that do not have any assigned node. A node that meets the requirements to run a pod is called a feasible node.

```

>  Kube-scheduler becomes responsible for assigning a suitable node to the pod based on 2 criteria:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 Kube-scheduler is responsible for assigning a suitable node to the pod based on 2 criteria:

```

1. Filtering - Checks available nodes for available resources, to meet requirements specificed in the pod.

> 2. Scoring - Based on the available resources when Filtering, ranking the avaliable nodes and choosing the highest ranking one, if 2 or more are equal, selection is random.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Scoring - Based on the available resources when Filtering, ranks the available nodes and chooses the highest ranking one. If 2 or more are equal, selection is random.

```

### Node Selector

You can schedule pods based on labels and nodeSelector, for example: `gpuEnabled: true`

Nodeconfig:

```yaml

> lables:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
labels:
```
I think?

    gpuEnabled: true
```

Podconfig:

```yaml
nodeSelector:
    gpuEnabled: true
```

## Affinity & antiAffinity

This is similar to `nodeSelector` bur greatly enhances the types of constraints you can express.

1. The affinity/anti-affinity language is more expressive. The language offers more matching rules.

> 2. Rules can be "preferred" rather than a hard requirement, so if the scheduler can't satisfy it, the pod will still be scheduled

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Rules can be "preferred" rather than hard requirements, so if the scheduler can't satisfy them, the pod will still be scheduled

```

3. You can constrain against labels on other pods running on the node (or other topological domain), rather than against labels on the node itself.

### Node Affinity

> There are currently two types of node affinity, called `requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution` and `preferredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution`. You can think of them as "hard" and "soft" requirements to schedule a pod. `IgnoredDuringExecution` part of the names means that, if labels on a node change at runtime such that the affinity rules on a pod are no longer met, the pod continues to run on the node.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are currently two types of node affinity, called `requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution` and `preferredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution`. You can think of them as "hard" and "soft" requirements to schedule a pod. The `IgnoredDuringExecution` part of the names means that if labels on a node change at runtime such that the affinity rules on a pod are no longer met, the pod continues to run on the node.
```

```yaml
spec:
  affinity:
    nodeAffinity:
      requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution:
        nodeSelectorTerms:
        - matchExpressions:
          - key: kubernetes.io/name
            operator: In
            values:
            - ABC
            - XYZ
      preferredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution:
      - weight: 100
        preference:
          matchExpressions:
          - key: label-key
            operator: In
            values:
            - label-value
```

> This example only allow pods to be scheduled on nodes with a key `kubernetes.io/name` with value `ABC` or `XYZ` Among the nodes matching this criteria, nodes with key `label-key` and value `label-value` will be preferred.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This example only allows pods to be scheduled on nodes with a key `kubernetes.io/name` with value `ABC` or `XYZ`. Among the nodes matching this criteria, nodes with the key `label-key` and value `label-value` will be preferred.

```

> The `weight` field ir ranged 1-100 and for each node matching all scheduling requirements, the kube-scheduler computes a score, as mentioned earlier. Then adds this number to that sum to calculate the best matching node.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `weight` field is ranged 1-100 and for each node matching all scheduling requirements, the kube-scheduler computes a score, as mentioned earlier. It then adds this number to that sum to calculate the best matching node.
```

> ### podAffinity and podAntiaffinity

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### podAffinity and podAntiAffinity

```

> podAffinity and podAntiAffinity lets you constrain which nodes pod are eligible to be scheduled on based of label of the pods running on the node rather then labels on the node.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
podAffinity and podAntiAffinity lets you constrain which nodes pods are eligible to be scheduled on based of label of the pods running on the node rather then the labels on the node.
```

> podAnitAffinity

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
podAntiAffinity
```

```yaml
spec:
  affinity:
    podAffinity:
      requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution:
      - labelSelector:
          matchExpressions:
          - key: label1
            operator: In
            values:
            - label-value
        topologyKey: topology.kubernetes.io/zone
    podAntiAffinity:
      preferredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution:
      - weight: 100
        podAffinityTerm:
          labelSelector:
            matchExpressions:
            - key: label2
              operator: In
              values:
              - label-value-anti
          topologyKey: topology.kubernetes.io/zone
```

> This example show an example where we use both affinity rules.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This shows an example where we use both affinity rules.
```

> Affinity rule: the pod can be only scheduled onto a node if that node is in the same zone as at least one already-running pod that has a label with key `label1` and value `label-value`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Affinity rule: the pod can only be scheduled onto a node if that node is in the same zone as at least one already-running pod that has a label with key `label1` and value `label-value`.

```

> antiAffinity rule: the pod should not be scheduled onto a node if that node is in the same zone as a pod with label having key `label2` and value `label-value-anti`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
antiAffinity rule: the pod should not be scheduled onto a node if that node is in the same zone as a pod with a label having key `label2` and value `label-value-anti`

```

```yaml
  affinity:
    podAntiAffinity:
      preferredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution:
        - podAffinityTerm:
            labelSelector:
              matchExpressions:
                - key: prometheus
                  operator: In
                  values:
                    - xks
            topologyKey: kubernetes.io/hostname
          weight: 100
        - podAffinityTerm:
            labelSelector:
              matchExpressions:
                - key: prometheus
                  operator: In
                  values:
                    - xks
            topologyKey: topology.kubernetes.io/zone
          weight: 100
```

> This is an example configuration of podAntiAffinity for Prometheus. Spreading the pod deployment based on `topology.kubernetes.io/zone` and `topology.kubernetes.io/hostname` to only allow 1 pod on each node and to mitigate downtime in case an entire zone goes down, i.e if a pod runs in zone A with key `prometheus` and value `xks` dont schedule in zone A, choose zone B or C. Note that these settings are "preferred" and not required.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is an example configuration of podAntiAffinity for Prometheus. Spreading the pod deployment based on `topology.kubernetes.io/zone` and `topology.kubernetes.io/hostname` to only allow 1 pod on each node and to mitigate downtime in case an entire zone goes down, e.g: if a pod runs in zone A with key `prometheus` and value `xks` do not schedule it in zone A - choose zone B or C. Note that these settings are "preferred" and not required.
```

> This is recommended to use, critical services should be distributed to multiple zones to mitigate downtime.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We recommend using this configuration, as critical services should be distributed to multiple zones to minimize downtime.
```

> You can read more about this in the official documentation: <https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/assign-pod-node/>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can read more about this [in the official documentation](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/assign-pod-node/).
```
